    PCAZIP UTILITIES 4.1

Introduction:

These tools implement the PCA-based trajectory compression method
described in Meyer et al., J. Chem. Theor. Comp. 2006, 2, 251-258, 
and provide other tools to extract various useful information from
the compressed files.

License:

These tools are provided under the terms of the Gnu Public License (GPL).
See the top of each source file for details and the file COPYING.

The exceptions to this are the files ssyevr.f and slamch.f , which provide
a minimal LAPACK library, and matfit.f, which is public domain. 

Programs:

pcazip:   compresses trajectory files. Uses the VMD molfile plugins
          to support a wide range of trajectory file formats.

pcaunzip: Reinflates a  pcazip-compressed trajectory file. Note that
          the compression is 'lossy', so uncompressed files will not
          be identical to the originals!

pczdump:  Extracts various useful information from a pcazip-compressed
          trajectory file.

pczcomp:  Basic program to compare two .pcz files. 

quickmask: Little utility program to concatenate and/or mask down 
           trajectory files. Outputs in the Scripps .binpos format.

Compilation:

Prerequisites are a Fortran-95 compatible compiler. A minimal LAPACK
library is included, but you may wish to replace this with optimised
versions available on your own system. 

For full fuctionality you must also have the VMD molfile plugins installed 
and the f77 interface compiled - see:
http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/plugins/molfile/ 
for details

However, basic support for AMBER (crd, crdbox, binpos) and DCD files is
available if you don't have this.

In a nutshell:

cd src
(choose and edit Makefile as needed)
make all

But we have only really tested the software on Intel machines, 
using intel (v10 and above) and g95 compilers - intel 8/9 compilers 
seem to have problems.

Details of source files:

pcazip.f90:     The main compression program
pcaunzip.f90:   The main uncompression program
pczdump.f90:    Extract various sorts of data from a .pcz file
pczcomp.f90:    Compare two pcz files - basic, needs upgrading...
quickmask.f90:  Trajectory file processing program
x_io.f90:       Trajectory file IO utilities
pcz_io.f90:     'PCZ format' file IO utilities
eigenutils.f90: Simple interface to the eigenvector routines
trajutils.f90:  Utilities operating on trajectory data
geom.f90:       Geometrical transformation utilities
mygetargs.f90:  Command-line argument processing utilities
rscode.f90:     Utilities that convert to/from the base-64 style encoding
                used in a now-obsolete (compact ASCII) .pcz format
ssyevr.f        A minimal subset of the LAPACK library
slamch.f        Part of the minimal LAPACK library which must be compiled
                without any optimisation
matfit.f:       The venerable least-squares fitting routine

Testing:
The pcztest subdirectory contains some small trajectory files, the corresponding
PDB format file (actually a DNA dodecamer: pdb code 1fq2), and a 'mask' file
(the 22 P atoms).
Run 'test.sh >& test.log', and compare the result with 'compare.log'

Finally:
Good luck!

Charlie Laughton 21st July 2011

School of Pharmacy
University of Nottingham
Nottingham NG7 2RD
UK
charles.laughton[at]nottingham.ac.uk
